talk about your book.
Hi.
We're talking with Kathleen.
It's first time I think I've seen Kathleen with a C. Is that unusual?
Yes, it's an old Jewish name that runs in the family.
I don't know where my parents came up with it, but I like it.
It's very nice.
Tell me about, where is Pequotter in your mind?
I decided, partly because of the mistake I made in the last book, that I wanted this town to be completely imaginary, made up.
Partly it was so I could use it as a character, really make it a character in the book.
And partly I didn't want to make mistakes, put the wrong kind of flora and fauna in it and have the street names wrong.
I just didn't want to have to think about that.
I wanted to just create it.
So the name Pequot is an Indian name from New England, right, and in Connecticut also, which is where I'm from.
I'm from Westport, Connecticut.
Really?
Yes.
I have two papers in Connecticut that take my feature, New London, Tennessee, and Manchester.
We'll mention that.
Okay.
They always like that.
That's right.
Local girl makes good.
Local angle.
So I used the name, which I really like, and I wanted to give it a kind of New England feel, but I wanted it to be possibly Massachusetts, possibly Cape Cod, possibly Connecticut.
It's a little bit physically, a little bit like Stonington, Connecticut.
It could possibly be on Long Island.
Possibly on Long Island, yeah.
And it could also possibly be...
The Jersey Shore, one of the reference books that I used, I went to the Strand, this wonderful bookstore.
Great bookstore.
Yes.
And I just poked around in the local history, and I found a book with the best title of any book I've ever seen.
And I'll try to get it right.
It was not Towns of New Jersey...
Not small towns of New Jersey.
Yeah, it was not any of these.
It was not small towns of southern New Jersey.
It was not forgotten small towns of southern New Jersey.
It was more forgotten small towns of southern New Jersey.
My favorite title.
This was at the Strand?
Yeah, it was.
So the first one must have been a smash hit.
Yeah, right.
That's what I thought.
Here's the sequel.
More Forgotten Small Towns of Southern New Jersey.
That's great.
There was Pequod.
It was great.
Well, there wasn't a Pequod, actually, but I just used all these different stories from, because there's a lot of little bits of local history in the book, and
And a lot of the names I got, the name Scattergoods was a real name of some people.
You got me on Scattergoods, by the way.
I'm usually pretty good at figuring these things out.
That came from, it was some family that settled a town in southern New Jersey.
But I also mean the resolution of the story.
Oh, oh, oh, I got you.
Good, good, good.
That's very good.
When I first wrote it, someone said, why don't you just put up a big poster saying what's going to happen?
But I fixed it and made it less obvious.
No, I didn't see that.
No, I fixed it.
It was very obvious when I first wrote it, and I like it the way it is now.
So anyway, that's what... I wanted it to have... Basically, that town is a summer town.
I think anyone who's ever...
been in New England and been to a town on the water in the summer will instantly recognize it, even though it's not real.
And so is it kind of like a Shakespearean comedy in that respect?
I mean, it is a summery kind of a... Yeah, I mean, I hadn't... ...like quality to it, I guess?
I hadn't thought of Shakespeare, and I would never even, you know, make that comparison, but... The only reason it comes to mind is I'm just writing about Jane Smiley's book this week.
Which is very definitely almost like a Shakespearean comedy.
The new one?
Moo?
I love Moo.
Oh, I think it's brilliant.
How could she go from that previous book to this one?
She's incredible.
She really is.
That book, I'm going to write about it also, if I can find the time.
Because I just loved it.
It's brilliant.
And if you write...
If you write humorous novels, you see just, you know, it's a great work of art.
I mean, it's so difficult what she did, and she made it look so easy.
And then I went back and read A Thousand Acres, which I've never read.
It's completely different.
Completely different skills involved.
It's amazing.
She's amazing.
Yeah, my piece, we don't have to talk about her, but it's three novels in a row, and then Greenlanders was like an epic.
It was a historical...
Is that good?
I haven't read that.
Yeah, that was just Greenlanders, it's called.
It's an epic.
I mean, it's a historical epic set, you know, a thousand years ago.
Oh, did you like it?
No, I like these two better, but that's beside the point.
Well, maybe I'll try and read it.
But my point was with her, I said, do I sense something here?
You know, Shakespeare was a blear, it was a tragedy.
Here's the history, here's the comedy.
She said, not bad, you know, but she does see these two as a pair.
There's agriculture in Iowa.
Well, it's the two sides.
Anyway, I hadn't thought of that, but some reviewers said something about Midsummer Night's Dream and about Puck and about a love potion, and I thought how wonderful, because in fact the love letter does function as a kind of love potion in a
Now that you've mentioned love letters didn't really work in Shakespeare, was it much do about nothing, or were it all love letters?
You got me.
I didn't sit in on all of the Shakespeare courses with my husband.
I sat in on the Lear.
With my last book, what I was thinking of very specifically were movies like The Awful Truth and those kind of romantic farce comedies.
With this one, I really wanted to write a more conventional novel with a beginning, a middle, an end.
that was less of a farce and was really a romance, but one that, I mean, I like reading.
But you worked in a little mystery element to it.
Yeah, because it seems to me that most of the time when you think about a plot and that there's a real relation, that what mysteries do, and maybe the reason they're so satisfying, is they kind of boil down the essence of narrative, which is what's going to happen and who did it, who did what.
And so I played around with that.
That was fun also.
I mean, this book, although it's smaller and in some ways lighter than the last book, it was much more complicated to write.
And let's talk a bit about using the bookstore and this passion for words and things.
Well, the bookstore seemed like a really rich environment.
I spend a lot of time in bookstores, and I browse, and I buy, and I think that there's something very personal about one's relationship to a small bookstore.
Even if you've just come in for the first time, it's as if you're meeting someone, because the taste of the owner is apparent, and you strike up a relationship right away with that store.
And that interested me.
And also, I had a friend who had been the manager of a small store in New York called Three Lives, and she was always telling me these stories of all these things that had happened there, and everybody was flirting with everybody else.
And I thought, what a wonderful little hothouse with lots of people, or for me, with lots of characters walking in off the street.
There was just a tremendous amount of possibility there.
And plus I got to write about books and to mention books, and, you know, I like them.
Well, you mentioned the Wilson-Bolkoff letters, which I have and which I enjoy, and Elizabeth Bishop's letters from last year.
Elizabeth Bishop's letters were amazing.
Really, one of the great collections.
Yeah, and very moving when you think about her life and compared to the poetry.
I mean, they're very different.
I found them very interesting, because then I started thinking about what letters are.
and especially if you don't write letters, which I don't, but I like getting them.
Now, when did you start thinking about letters?
Well, once I... Okay, well, here's what happened.
I thought, oh, good, a bookstore.
I'm going to put it in a bookstore.
So we started with the place first?
We did.
And I thought, oh, good.
Do we have Helen at this point?
Well, we had someone who was a flirt.
Yes, we had Helen.
A 40-ish flirt?
A 40-ish flirt.
I hadn't decided with whom she was going to fall in love.
I knew I wanted a very particular kind of short, you know, a kind of
Every 20-year-old kid's dream, I have to tell you.
Good.
It's a perfect summer.
Well, every 42-year-old woman's dream as well, I imagine.
I really wanted the kind of love and romance that is very powerful even as you realize how ridiculous it is.
I mean, that's what was important to me, that it shouldn't be someone
with whom she could have a life.
I mean, you could, I suppose, but it would be rather difficult.
So it does really have to be summer.
It has to be a place like Cape Cod or wherever.
Right.
It's a fable, I mean, in a way.
And in September we're all going to wake up, maybe.
But I think what Helen wakes up to in September, because she does wake up in September,
But what she wakes up to is her own vulnerability, which is something she didn't want to think about in the past, and how important that is and how that's one of the things that makes us human.
I mean, that's one of the good things, to be that vulnerable to feeling and to emotion.
And so I think in a way she discovers a weakness, but I think that she realizes that that weakness is one of the great
joys, that it's a privilege to get to feel that particular weakness.
That was the thing I was really trying to get at.
It's not so easy in this society to come up with a pair who would have to keep something secret, because not too much is taboo anymore.
But I think this pretty much counts.
This qualifies.
Especially in a village where she is a known person.
Right.
Right, she's a respectable person with a child.
She knows the parents of this.
Right, it's a little outré.
I mean, there is some baggage to this.
Right, exactly.
And that adds to the sense of ridiculousness and of absurdity, and also that it's wrong in the eyes of most of the world, and yet she and Johnny both feel that it's right.
Did he have to be Johnny, by the way?
My editor, whose name was John, when I started this, and now my editor's, he left, and so I have another, Janet is my editor, but he said, Janet, Janet Silver, he said, Johnny, it has to be Johnny, I hate the name Johnny, because it's horrible, no 20-year-old would allow himself to be called Johnny.
And I thought, well, that's true, but that's part of what's going on here.
And that's part of, you know, she thinks she has a certain hold over him because she's older and she's his boss and she's bossy and very confident.
Well, she barks at him like he's a dog at this point.
Yeah.
And she knows she's barking at him.
Yeah, she barks and he knows that she's barking at him, you know.
I mean, at one point he feels as if he's the dog on the leash.
And that was part of what made the whole thing ridiculous, and yet there was nothing either of them really could do.
These were very strong and very real feelings.
I mean, things can be real at the same time that they're preposterous.
And that combination, I think, is very powerful.
And I've always loved to write comedy about things that are preposterous, but I also at the same time wanted to write about this very earnest, powerful, real...
feeling.
So that was kind of the fun of doing both those things.
You say, in your books, are they all comic novels?
Yeah, they're all comic.
And the first two are farces.
The first one was about a girl in the hospital, which is very autobiographical, and it's really a farce.
It's sort of a black farce.
And the second one is about the same family, and there's a stalker, and
But they're very much comic.
And then the last one is a little more complicated and is sort of what I consider an intellectual farce, a comedy of... That one's still in print and paperback.
Yeah, I think with your passion for books, you'd like it.
So that one, it was sort of instead of people slamming doors and going in and out off the stage, that one was really more ideas slamming doors.
Now, is this a satire?
This one?
No.
Because one of your reviewers said they called it a satire.
I found that very interesting, and someone said I skewered characters.
I was looking for the satire element.
I don't write satires, and I think that sometimes people just use the satire word when they mean comedy.
You have to satirize something.
You have to satirize something, and I sometimes comment on things or describe them in a funny way, but I think satire requires a certain...
real anger about a target.
You really have to have a target.
Right.
And an anger about the way things are and a desire to change them in some way.
I just don't feel that way.
I find things amusing, a lot of things, and silly.
I interpret a lot of things as amusing, but it's different.
How do you get into your karmic mode?
Oh, it's just I'm stuck with it.
I mean, are you witty in company?
No, I'm just deadly sort of earnest.
Dave Barry, who I interviewed a couple of times, the problem is people really expect a performance from you.
I wonder, do you find that kind of a... Well, I'm not well-known enough yet, but just in regular life when you go out to dinner and things like that, people expect some sparkle and wit.
that's just the way it is.
And I sort of sit, and whenever an opportunity comes up and something is... I can't remember anything.
I can't remember anyone's name suddenly, and I'm just not... It's not the way my mind works.
I don't make witticisms and fond mo and things like that.
Yeah, well, we can't one-liners either.
I think the humor of this
book.
You really have to be into the book.
I know from reviewing it, it's not going to be that easy to just pull out a line.
I mean, there are some very funny lines.
But then I also have to set up the context as well, I think.
Right, because it has to do more with the way people are, and the way they feel, and the way they see things, and how one person's perception clashes with another person's perception.
I mean, that to me is
what humor often is about, and misperception, which is one reason it's so much fun to write about families, because they're the perfect comic group, since you're stuck with them, and you didn't choose them, and you're all different, and there you are.
But look at the difference between yourself, say, and Sue Miller, who writes about families.
You're looking at the humorous sides of it.
Well, that's just, you know, I mean, people deal with the world in different ways, and somehow, it's partly my family's very funny, and we, in general, have a sort of, you know, just, you know, I mean, you know, bad things happen, and they always turn everyone's just laughing.
It's just the way we are.
Just as a speculative question here, there's a publication in the Hamptons on Long Island that takes my stuff
And I usually try and find some way to pitch them a story.
I mean, is it possible that this, I mean, just could this be a place not unlike something of Manhattan?
Oh yeah, I definitely had… I could kind of package it in that manner.
One of the towns I had in mind was Sag Harbor.
I really, I really… Have you spent any time out there at all?
Yeah, I've spent some time out there, and, you know, I've spent summers out there, and I've just visited, and we used to sail and go there.
And also, I mean, I go to Connecticut in the summer and stay at my mother's, but all of New York goes out there, so I, you know,
Which is why I'm happy to be in this paper, and it really is a terrible newspaper.
Really?
But they pay very well.
That's good.
But they're basically incompetent.
I mean, they have no .
.
I don't have to transcribe all that soliloquy.
No, that's right.
So, we're talking about writing funny, I guess.
Right.
Give me a little bit of your background, because they really didn't give me a biographical thing.
Okay, here's my background.
I grew up in Westport, Connecticut, wanting to be a writer.
Paul Newman's?
Paul Newman's town.
Neighbor or whatever.
Yes, all of Westport is Paul Newman's neighborhood.
I wrote poetry in high school that was really terrible and embarrassing, and you will find some of it in the book.
That's mine, which I discovered.
I really thought it had been destroyed.
But you can use it.
You've been able to recycle it.
It's funny.
I was delighted, but when I found it, I was looking at old letters for this book, and in this packet of old letters I found
this folder full of poetry, and I almost died of embarrassment.
I almost didn't use it, I was so embarrassed.
But then the vanity of composition overcame me, and I used it.
And then I went to Sarah Lawrence in order to study poetry, but the minute I got there, I got embarrassed and terrified, and I took animal behavior in medieval history.
and I thought I was going to become a medievalist.
I eventually went to graduate school in medieval history, which I was terrible at, University of Chicago.
I was freezing cold.
I was very disoriented.
I have a terrible memory, so I got everything mixed up.
It was awful.
I mean, they were very nice to me and sort of said,
you can have an M.A.
if you'll go away.
So I went away without even getting the degree.
Could you handle manuscripts?
Yeah, it was great.
It was very exciting.
But I realized that I was in the wrong field when I got a fellowship and went to Florence for the summer.
And it was in paleography, which is studying handwriting and
Humphrey Wanley is in my book, and he was a paleographer.
Really?
And it was wonderful.
I'd sit in the library and I'd look at all these funny little signs and scripts and everything.
But then I'd get sort of bored and hot, and I just spent most of the summer buying shoes in Florence.
And I thought, there's something wrong.
Perhaps I'm in the wrong profession.
So I left graduate school.
I decided I would become a buyer, since I like to buy shoes.
But, you know, you have to actually have some talent.
And Melda Marcos would have been a good contact.
Mentrix.
And so anyway, I luckily couldn't even get an interview to be a buyer anywhere.
And a friend of mine, a friend of the family, was an editor at the Village Voice at the time.
And I had been in the hospital for a year and had all these problems with my hips, and it was pretty much a nightmare.
And she said, why don't you write about that for The Voice?
Who was the editor?
Her name was Margo Hentoff.
Oh, is she related to Nat?
She's Nat's wife, yeah.
And they're very close friends of the family.
And so I said, well, okay, I'll try writing it.
And I wrote a piece, and it was very, you know, it was fun.
It was really good, and I was really happy.
And how old are you at this point?
I was 20...
That's pretty good.
Something like that.
Usually we were all driven to be writers from, you know.
I was driven when I was little, and then I got driven away.
I mean, I was really frightened of it, and I didn't want to try it and fail.
To have that kind of a positive response from your first piece, though.
Now, if it had been bad, do you think that would have tried buying a canton?
That would have been the end of it.
But this is how Margot edited it.
She'd look at it, and she'd say,
well, there's something, I don't like this part so much.
And I said, well, could you be specific?
And she'd say, yes.
And she'd take a red pen, and she'd go like this, and just knock it out, and turn the page, and go, and cross it out.
But then other times... She was willing to work with you.
Oh, she was wonderful.
And, you know, I said... She said, you know, just... She said, I know how you talk, and I've, you know, and I know the way you see things, and just pretend you're writing a letter.
Just sit down and write it.
So you were very lucky to Cameron.
She's been, throughout my life, she's sort of served as both a model and a teacher, and Nat was also very good to me.
When I was in seventh grade, my English teacher gave me a really hard time all year, because I was sort of rebellious and obnoxious, and she hated everything I wrote and hated everything I said.
It was very depressing, and my mother, my wonderful mother, took one of my papers and
sent it to Nat, and Nat wrote back a postcard, which I still have hanging over my desk, which says, your teacher's an ass, you're a real writer, best Nat.
Isn't that nice?
Yeah, it was wonderful.
Are they still down, you mentioned the Strand, are they still down there on Broadway?
Well that's where his office, his office was on.
Broadway and 14th were there on there.
The Strand?
The Strand is at Broadway and 13th, I think.
13th, right.
But the voice used to be... No, yeah, I guess it is.
I haven't been there.
When I was working there, I was at 11th and University, so I think it is... I don't know.
I haven't been there in a long time.
So anyway, Margot was great.
As she was editing this piece, there were parts of it.
She said, well, this doesn't belong in the article.
Save it for your novel.
And I said, oh, my novel.
Okay.
And I just sat down.
That's amazing.
I said, okay.
I do whatever Margot says.
So she said, you're writing a novel.
So I said, oh, I must be writing a novel.
And, you know, that novel is very unskilled in a lot of ways.
It's published, right?
You know what, I'm very, very proud of it.
I love it, actually.
Who published it?
Knopf.
How can you beat that?
It was great.
I couldn't.
And it was very well received, and John Updike reviewed it.
It was wonderful.
It was amazing.
What year was that?
It came out the year my son was born, which is 83.
Four books in 12 years.
It's very episodic.
You know, it's one, because what I did was, I thought all you have to do is get to the end.
You don't have to think about structure, which I didn't know how to think about.
You just have to, there's the beginning, a middle, and an end.
It was autobiographical, so I didn't have to really worry about what the story was.
And I just wrote a page a day.
That was what I did.
So it took me a year, and it's 365 pages approximately.
Manuscript pages or book pages?
Yeah, I think so, or typed pages.
So each page is sort of a little episode, but it works.
I mean, it's on its own terms.
And you got those kind of reviews, and so you were... It was wonderful.
My second book took me seven years to write then, because I then had two children, and it was just impossible to do anything.
And by then, that book, you know, I had trouble selling it.
My first editor was not interested.
It went to a lot of different places.
That's so disheartening, yeah.
But finally, you know, it wound up at Farrar Strauss, which I was very happy about, and had a wonderful editor named Michael DiCapua.
That's very, very well known.
And, you know, he makes you work very hard, and he made me, in a way, be able to take myself more seriously.
It was a big breakthrough.
And while editing that book, which was called To the Birdhouse, I started thinking about Ramos' niece.
And that was a big change at that moment.
I mean, I love the first two books, but these last books are just, they're different.
I mean, in a way I think... You elevated your craft.
Well, you know, in a way I think I'll never write a book as good as Alice in Bed, my first book, because it had a certain...
On the other hand, I think in other ways, I think these books are better.
Oh, you're more professional now.
Yeah, so it's a mix.
And it's not as if I have a choice.
I can't write another first novel, and at the time I couldn't write a fourth novel, so I'm happy to... Are you at work on the fifth novel?
I'm just starting to kind of think about who's who and what it might be about.
And you live in New York, I think you said?
Yeah, I live in Manhattan.
And I have two little boys.
Great.
How old?
Their birthdays are in June, and one's going to be twelve, and one's going to be eight.
I have two daughters.
How old are they?
Twelve and almost fourteen.
Oh, man.
We have a Labrador Retriever.
You're in the thick of it.
Yeah.
share the same birthday, which is tomorrow.
Oh, happy birthday.
And it's my 52nd birthday.
Oh, that's how old my husband is, too.
And that's a big deal.
I was telling my editor the other day, and I said, you know what, Alan, I said, this is, and wouldn't you know, I had a take.
You have no trouble, obviously, writing about the sexuality of a woman, being a woman, but I find that with little Johnny, you're able to actually kind of put yourself
Well, you know, we writers.
Yeah, but I know women like Mary Gordon who will readily admit that she can't do men, you know, every time she tries.
Well, I had a lot of trouble, less with the sexuality, which I think there's a certain universal quality to sexual excitement, perhaps.
But I had trouble getting inside Johnny's head and trying to see the world
through a man's eye.
Especially the one that young, it seems.
Well, you know, in a way I felt it was easier to do a young kid than to do an adult, because I think that there are certain very strong predilections that young people have, and I think it's shared by girls and boys.
And it's probably more transparent, too.
Yeah, I think that's true.
And so I felt that somehow his youth was what I could concentrate on rather than his maleness.
That may be a weakness.
I don't know.
I worked very hard on it.
And I personally fell in love with him and thought he was wonderful.
And a lot of men I know have read it and felt very close to him.
Well, I told you.
I said, every kid's green.
Yeah.
But other guys think it's sort of silly and sentimental.
And, you know, there's a long tradition, a literary tradition, of these kinds of relationships, but it's not an American tradition.
Kind of like Lolita in reverse, in a way.
Lolita in reverse.
I mean, Colette wrote about this, and what's his name, Raymond Radigay, and there's a wonderful Canadian writer who's actually Hungarian, I think, but he wrote a book called In Praise of Older Women, which is fantastic.
Oh, that's a famous book.
I read it when I was a kid.
It's terrific, actually.
It's great.
But it's not a real American literary thing that happens.
But, you know, it was not so easy.
I mean, I had to really think about it.
And you had mentioned earlier that your first two novels had continuing characters, is that right?
Yeah, it's the same family.
Well, I mean, are these characters safely between the covers of this book?
Yes, I think this is a discreet incident, this book.
Sometimes, because I get very attached to my characters, I think of bringing them back in a minor role in another book.
But I'm not sure if that would be coy in some way or gimmicky.
I don't know.
But, you know, to me, they all seem kind of... They all still exist, and I sometimes think about what they would think about something or what they would do, and so it's a temptation.
But I don't know.
But no, these, I think certainly Helen and Johnny are, they're sort of left in that little limbo at the end.
And she has her flaws, too, doesn't she, her character.
I certainly think so.
I mean, I wanted to make her a flawed character.
I like writing about flawed characters, particularly women.
And one of the... And her selfishness is kind of...
She's selfish, and she's tough, and she's smug, and she's egotistical.
I don't think those are terrible things.
But there are things that she wants.
Yeah, I think those are some of the things that make a person interesting.
If that's all there is, then they're not very appealing.
But one of the great challenges and pleasures in this book and all my books, really, has been...
trying to write about a character who is flawed but with whom the reader can sympathize.
For the first three books, I read Emma before writing each of them just because she's a sort of quintessential perfect heroine who is unsympathetic and yet completely sympathetic.
And the other one is Mary Poppins.
I don't know if you've read Mary Poppins as an adult, but it's quite amazing.
Well, I read it as an adult and I thought, how does she do this?
This is magic.
How does she make this woman appealing?
She's such a bitch.
So that was, yes, she's meant to be flawed and interesting and, you know, full.
It's a nice summer story, too.
I wouldn't call it a summer read.
But it's a nice summer story.
You know, summer's very important to me, because I get out of the city, and I love being in the country, and I'm never there.
And Westport is no longer the country, but you can pretend.
And my mother's house is, you know, sort of surrounded by honeysuckle, and so you can't see anybody else.
And it's a little oasis, and it's a very powerful
feeling when I get out there, and I love it.
And Ramos' niece took place completely indoors, and I really felt the need to.
I'm going to have to get that.
I'm going to run because I'm close to getting a $30 ticket.
Don't get a $30 ticket.
Would you do me the honors on that?
Yes.
You would.
I have what has to be done.